README.md, before:

# Common visualization UI fragments

[![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@gros/visualization-ui.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@gros/visualization-ui)
[![Build 
status](https://github.com/grip-on-software/visualization-ui/actions/workflows/visualization-ui.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/grip-on-software/visualization-ui/actions/workflows/visualization-ui.yml)
[![Coverage 
Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/grip-on-software/visualization-ui/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/github/grip-on-software/visualization-ui?branch=master)
[![Quality Gate 
Status](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=grip-on-software_visualization-ui&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/project/overview?id=grip-on-software_visualization-ui)

This library contains a number of user interface fragments to be used in 
visualization based on [Data-Driven Documents](https://d3js.org/).

## Installation

Install the fragments using `npm install --save @gros/visualization-ui`, then 
use them in your visualization sources with
```js
import {Locale, Navbar, Navigation, Spinner} from '@gros/visualization-ui';
```

This requires that your visualization is built via 
[Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/) or some other dependency bundler that 
supports rewriting ES2015 or later syntax.

Additionally, to enable spinner animations, include the SCSS sources into your
bundler, or add the distributed CSS bundle to a Web page, for example using:

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="dist/bundle.min.css">
```

## Overview

The library provides four classes: `Locale`, `Navbar`, `Navigation` and 
`Spinner`. Objects must be instantiated with `new` and be provided an object as 
the first argument upon construction, which is provides configuration options 
for the fragment except for `Locale` where it provides localization 
specifications. All classes except for `Locale` have a configuration option 
`container` which defines a query selector for an element to insert the 
fragment into. In the `Navbar` class, the locale is passed separately upon 
construction.

### Locale

Create a localization object to provide translated messages and attributes of 
a selected locale. For this purpose, the object must be instantiated with an 
object containing locale-specific attribute objects, with language codes as 
keys of the encompassing object. The attribute objects should have the same 
keys as each other, where `"messages"` plays a special role; it must be an 
object containing message keys and raw output or `sprintf`-compatible format 
strings. Also, `"language"` must provide a human-readable description of the 
locale in its own language.

The localization object can select a different language at any time, and can be 
queried for any attribute or message from the locale object. Additionally, it 
can generate a navigation list for selecting a different language (but it does
not handle the selection change event itself and defaults to reloading the page 
with a different language as query parameter and the same anchor), and it can 
automatically replace elements with a `data-message` attribute in the document 
or a certain selection with their locale equivalent, using the element children 
as arguments. It can also replace attributes of elements when they are prefixed 
with `data-message-` and their attribute name is explicitly provided in the 
call to `updateMessages`.

Setup:

```js
import * as d3 from 'd3';
import {Locale} from '@gros/visualization-ui';
import spec from './locales.json';
const locales = new Locale(spec, lang="en");
// Select locale from query string
locales.select(URLSearchParams(window.location.search).get("lang"));

console.log(locales.message("test"));
console.log(locales.message("format", [3, 'baz']));
// Replace all messages in document
locales.updateMessages();

// Replace all messages in a selection
locales.updateMessages(d3.select("#content"));

// Replace all messages in the document, including specific attributes
// (data-message-title and data-message-alt, in this example).
locales.updateMessages(d3.selection(), ["title", "alt"]);

// Generate navigation
locales.generateNavigation(d3.select("nav.languages"), "index.html", "lang");
```

### Navigation bar

Create a horizontal navigation heading to provide a branding, menus and other 
accessibility links. The navigation bar structure is defined by nested objects 
and arrays, and optionally configuration and locale sources. The structure is 
optimized to define a navigation heading with items, links, icons, but also 
branding, burger, menu, dropdown and other sections.

Setup:

```js
import {Locale, Navbar} from '@gros/visualization-ui';
const locales = new Locale();
const nav = new Navbar({
    "container": ".navbar", // Navbar container
    "languages": "#languages", // Selector of a menu in the structure
    "language_page": "index.html",
    "language_query": "lang",
    "my_url": "https://example.com" // Referenced from a link with "config" key
}, locales);
nav.fill(structure);
```

See 
[tests/navbar.json](https://github.com/grip-on-software/visualization-ui/blob/master/tests/navbar.json) 
for an example structure.

### Navigation

Create a horizontal navigation list to switch between views for different 
selections. The URL state is changed via the location hash, which is also 
checked on startup.
Multiple navigation objects can exist concurrently if a unique `prefix` is 
given to each of them. By default, the first item in the navigation is 
selected, but this can be overridden by returning `true` in `setCurrentItem`, 
in which case nothing is selected if an unknown item is set in the location 
hash at start.

Setup and usage:

```js
import {Navigation} from '@gros/visualization-ui';
const projectsList = ['BAR', 'BAZ', 'FOO'];
const projectsNavigation = new Navigation({
    container: '#navigation',
    prefix: 'project_',
    setCurrentItem: (project, hasProject, list) => {
        if (!hasProject) {
            console.log('An unknown project was selected: ' + project);
        }
        else {
            console.log('Selected project: ' + project);
        }
        return hasProject;
    },
    // Customize *link* properties of new items
    addElement: (element) => {
        element.text(d => `Project ${d}`);
    }
    // Access other *list item* selections via updateElement and removeElement
})
projectsNavigation.start(projectsList);

location.hash = '#project_FOO'; // Select the third project
location.hash = '#FOO'; // Not handled
location.hash = '#project_QUX'; // Unknown project selected

// Update navigation list
projectsNavigation.update(projectsList.concat('QUX', 'ZUR'));
```

The items in the list must be unique such that the appropriate element is 
selected. Using data objects as items in the provided navigation list is also 
supported as long as a `key` configuration is provided which acts as both the 
`d3` data key function and the default method of displaying text and creating 
a comparable anchor in the navigation item link.

### Spinner

Create a loading spinner which can be shown until the data is fully loaded.

Setup:
```js
import * as d3 from 'd3';
import {Spinner} from '@gros/visualization-ui';
const loadingSpinner = new Spinner({
    container: '#container',
    id: 'loading-spinner',
    width: d3.select('#container').node().clientWidth,
    height: 100,
    startAngle: 220
});
loadingSpinner.update({width: 100}); // New configuration
loadingSpinner.start();

// ... Perform some loading, processing, etc.

loadingSpinner.stop();
```

## Development

- The repository can be found on 
  [GitHub](https://github.com/grip-on-software/visualization-ui).
- [GitHub 
  Actions](https://github.com/grip-on-software/visualization-ui/actions) is 
  used to run unit tests.
- [SonarCloud](https://sonarcloud.io/project/overview?id=grip-on-software_visualization-ui) 
  performs quality gate scans and tracks them.
- [Coveralls](https://coveralls.io/github/grip-on-software/visualization-ui) 
  receives coverage reports and tracks them.
- You can perform local tests using `npm test`. This requires the source code
  repository for the test suite and installing the development dependencies,
  using `npm install` in the cloned repository directory.
- We publish releases to 
  [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@gros/visualization-ui).

## License

The visualization fragments library is licensed under the Apache 2.0 License.

Commit message:

Navbar: Remove focus class, dropdown links without href attribute
- No longer toggle dropdown activeness and prevent clicking on dropdown
  links for a custom dropdown class, which would make them function
  different from other classes while not providing a means to have one
  of either functions
- Mention in README that extensions for dropdown functionality are
  possible but require own choices and code
- Allow links (including those shown for a dropdown) to have no link,
  thus clicking does not immediately do something, to allow focus to
  work with dropdowns

README.md, after:

# Common visualization UI fragments

[![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@gros/visualization-ui.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@gros/visualization-ui)
[![Build 
status](https://github.com/grip-on-software/visualization-ui/actions/workflows/visualization-ui.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/grip-on-software/visualization-ui/actions/workflows/visualization-ui.yml)
[![Coverage 
Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/grip-on-software/visualization-ui/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/github/grip-on-software/visualization-ui?branch=master)
[![Quality Gate 
Status](https://sonarcloud.io/api/project_badges/measure?project=grip-on-software_visualization-ui&metric=alert_status)](https://sonarcloud.io/project/overview?id=grip-on-software_visualization-ui)

This library contains a number of user interface fragments to be used in 
visualization based on [Data-Driven Documents](https://d3js.org/).

## Installation

Install the fragments using `npm install --save @gros/visualization-ui`, then 
use them in your visualization sources with
```js
import {Locale, Navbar, Navigation, Spinner} from '@gros/visualization-ui';
```

This requires that your visualization is built via 
[Webpack](https://webpack.js.org/) or some other dependency bundler that 
supports rewriting ES2015 or later syntax.

Additionally, to enable spinner animations, include the SCSS sources into your
bundler, or add the distributed CSS bundle to a Web page, for example using:

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" href="dist/bundle.min.css">
```

## Overview

The library provides four classes: `Locale`, `Navbar`, `Navigation` and 
`Spinner`. Objects must be instantiated with `new` and be provided an object as 
the first argument upon construction, which is provides configuration options 
for the fragment except for `Locale` where it provides localization 
specifications. All classes except for `Locale` have a configuration option 
`container` which defines a query selector for an element to insert the 
fragment into. In the `Navbar` class, the locale is passed separately upon 
construction.

### Locale

Create a localization object to provide translated messages and attributes of 
a selected locale. For this purpose, the object must be instantiated with an 
object containing locale-specific attribute objects, with language codes as 
keys of the encompassing object. The attribute objects should have the same 
keys as each other, where `"messages"` plays a special role; it must be an 
object containing message keys and raw output or `sprintf`-compatible format 
strings. Also, `"language"` must provide a human-readable description of the 
locale in its own language.

The localization object can select a different language at any time, and can be 
queried for any attribute or message from the locale object. Additionally, it 
can generate a navigation list for selecting a different language (but it does
not handle the selection change event itself and defaults to reloading the page 
with a different language as query parameter and the same anchor), and it can 
automatically replace elements with a `data-message` attribute in the document 
or a certain selection with their locale equivalent, using the element children 
as arguments. It can also replace attributes of elements when they are prefixed 
with `data-message-` and their attribute name is explicitly provided in the 
call to `updateMessages`.

Setup:

```js
import * as d3 from 'd3';
import {Locale} from '@gros/visualization-ui';
import spec from './locales.json';
const locales = new Locale(spec, lang="en");
// Select locale from query string
locales.select(URLSearchParams(window.location.search).get("lang"));

console.log(locales.message("test"));
console.log(locales.message("format", [3, 'baz']));
// Replace all messages in document
locales.updateMessages();

// Replace all messages in a selection
locales.updateMessages(d3.select("#content"));

// Replace all messages in the document, including specific attributes
// (data-message-title and data-message-alt, in this example).
locales.updateMessages(d3.selection(), ["title", "alt"]);

// Generate navigation
locales.generateNavigation(d3.select("nav.languages"), "index.html", "lang");
```

### Navigation bar

Create a horizontal navigation heading to provide a branding, menus and other 
accessibility links. The navigation bar structure is defined by nested objects 
and arrays, and optionally configuration and locale sources. The structure is 
optimized to define a navigation heading with items, links, icons, but also 
branding, burger, menu, dropdown and other sections.

Setup:

```js
import {Locale, Navbar} from '@gros/visualization-ui';
const locales = new Locale();
const nav = new Navbar({
    "container": ".navbar", // Navbar container
    "languages": "#languages", // Selector of a menu in the structure
    "language_page": "index.html",
    "language_query": "lang",
    "my_url": "https://example.com" // Referenced from a link with "config" key
}, locales);
nav.fill(structure);
```

See 
[tests/navbar.json](https://github.com/grip-on-software/visualization-ui/blob/master/tests/navbar.json) 
for an example structure.

Note that the navigation heading may be extended with more JavaScript, in order 
to improve its functionality on mobile/touch devices, for example how dropdowns 
appear and how the menus function when the device switches between screen sizes 
that affect the responsive design. We do not provide this functionality because 
different choices may be made here and may be equally valid.

### Navigation

Create a horizontal navigation list to switch between views for different 
selections. The URL state is changed via the location hash, which is also 
checked on startup.
Multiple navigation objects can exist concurrently if a unique `prefix` is 
given to each of them. By default, the first item in the navigation is 
selected, but this can be overridden by returning `true` in `setCurrentItem`, 
in which case nothing is selected if an unknown item is set in the location 
hash at start.

Setup and usage:

```js
import {Navigation} from '@gros/visualization-ui';
const projectsList = ['BAR', 'BAZ', 'FOO'];
const projectsNavigation = new Navigation({
    container: '#navigation',
    prefix: 'project_',
    setCurrentItem: (project, hasProject, list) => {
        if (!hasProject) {
            console.log('An unknown project was selected: ' + project);
        }
        else {
            console.log('Selected project: ' + project);
        }
        return hasProject;
    },
    // Customize *link* properties of new items
    addElement: (element) => {
        element.text(d => `Project ${d}`);
    }
    // Access other *list item* selections via updateElement and removeElement
})
projectsNavigation.start(projectsList);

location.hash = '#project_FOO'; // Select the third project
location.hash = '#FOO'; // Not handled
location.hash = '#project_QUX'; // Unknown project selected

// Update navigation list
projectsNavigation.update(projectsList.concat('QUX', 'ZUR'));
```

The items in the list must be unique such that the appropriate element is 
selected. Using data objects as items in the provided navigation list is also 
supported as long as a `key` configuration is provided which acts as both the 
`d3` data key function and the default method of displaying text and creating 
a comparable anchor in the navigation item link.

### Spinner

Create a loading spinner which can be shown until the data is fully loaded.

Setup:
```js
import * as d3 from 'd3';
import {Spinner} from '@gros/visualization-ui';
const loadingSpinner = new Spinner({
    container: '#container',
    id: 'loading-spinner',
    width: d3.select('#container').node().clientWidth,
    height: 100,
    startAngle: 220
});
loadingSpinner.update({width: 100}); // New configuration
loadingSpinner.start();

// ... Perform some loading, processing, etc.

loadingSpinner.stop();
```

## Development

- The repository can be found on 
  [GitHub](https://github.com/grip-on-software/visualization-ui).
- [GitHub 
  Actions](https://github.com/grip-on-software/visualization-ui/actions) is 
  used to run unit tests.
- [SonarCloud](https://sonarcloud.io/project/overview?id=grip-on-software_visualization-ui) 
  performs quality gate scans and tracks them.
- [Coveralls](https://coveralls.io/github/grip-on-software/visualization-ui) 
  receives coverage reports and tracks them.
- You can perform local tests using `npm test`. This requires the source code
  repository for the test suite and installing the development dependencies,
  using `npm install` in the cloned repository directory.
- We publish releases to 
  [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@gros/visualization-ui).

## License

The visualization fragments library is licensed under the Apache 2.0 License.
